You are all resolved rather todie than to famish?
Resolved; resolved.
First, you know Caius Marcius ischief enemy to the people.
Let us kill him, and we'll havecorn at our own price.
For the gods know I speak thisin hunger for bread,
not in thirst for revenge.
He's a very dog to thecommonalty.
Consider you what services hehas done for his country?
Very well; and could be contentto give him good report for it
but that he pays himself withbeing proud.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
I say unto you, what he hathdone famously,
he did it to that end.
Though soft-conscienced men
can be content to say it was forhis country,
he did it to please his motherand to be partly proud,
which he is, even till thealtitude of his virtue.
What he cannot help in hisnature
you account a vice in him.
What shouts are these?
The other side of the city isrisen.
Soft.
Who comes here?
Worthy Menenius Agrippa,
one that hath always loved thepeople.
Where go you with bats andclubs?
The matter?
Speak, I pray you.
Our business is not unknown tothe senate.
They have had inkling thisfortnight
what we intend to do,
which now we'll show them indeeds.
Why, masters, my good friends,
mine honest neighbors,
will you undo yourselves?
We cannot, sir.
We are undone already.
I tell you, friends,
most charitable care have thepatricians of you.
Care for us?
True, indeed.
They ne'er cared for us, yetsuffer us to famish,
and their storehouses crammedwith grain;
make edicts for usury, tosupport usurers;
repeal daily any wholesome actestablished against the rich;
and provide more piercingstatutes daily
to chain up and restrain thepoor.
If the wars eat us not up, theywill,
and there's all the love theybear us.
Either you must confessyourselves wondrous malicious
or be accused of folly.
I shall tell you a pretty tale.
It may be you have heard it, butsince it serves my purpose,
I'll venture to stale it alittle more.
Well, I'll hear it, sir, yet youmust not think
to fob off our disgrace with atale.
But, and it please you, deliver.
There was a time when all thebody's members
rebelled against the belly,
thus accused it that only like agulf it did remain
in the midst of the body, idleand unactive,
still cupboarding the viand,
never bearing like labor withthe rest,
where the other instruments didsee and hear, devise,
instruct, walk, feel, andmutually participate,
did minister unto the appetitesand affection
common of the whole body.
The belly answered
Well, sir, what answer made thebelly?
Sir, I shall tell you.
With a kind of smile,
which ne'er came from the lungs,but even thus
for, look you,
I may make the belly smile aswell as speak.
It tauntingly replied to thediscontented members,
the mutinous parts that enviedhis receipt,
even so most fitly as you malignour senators
for that they are not such asyou.
Your belly's answer, what?
Your most grave belly wasdeliberate,
not rash like his accusers, andthus answered:
"True is it, my incorporatefriends,"
quoth he, "That I receive thegeneral food at first,
"which you do live upon, and fitit is,
"because I am the storehouse andthe shop of the whole body.
"But, if you do remember,
"I send it through the rivers ofyour blood,
"even to the court, the heart,to the seat of the brain,
"and through the cranks andoffices of man,
"the strongest nerves and smallinferior veins
"from me receive that naturalcompetency
"whereby they live,
and though that all at once,you, my good friends
this said the belly, mark me
Ay, sir; well, well.
"Though all at once cannot seewhat I do deliver out to each,
"yet I can make my audit up,
"that all from me do backreceive the flour of all,
and leave me but the bran."
What say you to it?
It was an answer.
How apply you this?
The senators of Rome are thisgood belly,
and you the mutinous members.
For examine their counsels andtheir cares,
digest things rightly touchingthe weal of the common.
You shall find no public benefitthat you receive,
but it proceeds or comes fromthem to you
and no way from yourselves.
What's the matter, youdissentious rogues,
that rubbing the poor itch ofyour opinion,
make yourselves scabs?
We have ever your good word.
He that will give good words tothee
will flatter beneath abhorring.
What would you have, you curs,that like nor peace nor war?
The one affrights you; the othermakes you proud.
He that trusts to you,
where he should find you lions,finds you hares;
where foxes, geese.
You are no surer, no,
than is the coal of fire uponthe ice
or hailstone in the sun.
Your virtue is to make himworthy whose offense subdues him
and curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness deservesyour hate.
Trust ye?
Hang ye.
What's the matter
that in these several places ofthe city
you cry against the noblesenate,
who, under the gods, keep you inawe,
which else would feed on oneanother?
What's their seeking?
For corn at their own rates,
whereof, they say, the city iswell stored.
Hang them!
They say!
They'll sit by the fire
and presume to know what's donein the capitol;
who's like to rise, who thrivesand who declines;
side factions and give outconjectural marriages;
making parties strong andfeebling such as stand
not in their liking below theircobbled shoes.
They say there's grain enough.
What says the other troop?
O, they're dissolved.
Hang them!
They said they were an-hungry,
sighed forth proverbs, thathunger broke stone walls,
that dogs must eat, that meatwas made for mouths,
that the gods sent not corn forthe rich men only.
With these shreds, they ventedtheir complainings,
which being answered and apetition granted them,
a strange one贸
to break the heart ofgenerosity,
and make bold power look pale.
They threw their caps
as they would hang them on thehorns of the moon,
shouting their emulation.
What is granted them?
Five tribunes to defend theirvulgar wisdoms
of their own choice.
One's Junius Brutus, SiciniusVelutus,
and I know not贸 'Sdeath!
The rabble should have firstunroofed the city,
ere so prevailed with me.
It will, in time, win upon power
and throw forth greater themesfor insurrection's arguing.
This is strange.
Go, get you home, you fragments!
What's the matter?
The news is, sir, the Volscesare in arms.
I am glad on it.
Then we shall have means to ventour musty superfluity.
They have a leader, TullusAufidius,
that will put you to it.
I sin in envying his nobility,
and were I any thing but what Iam,
I would wish me only he.
You have fought together.
Were half to half the world bythe ears and he.
Upon my party, I'd revolt onlyto make my wars with him.
He is a lion that I am proud tohunt.
Then, worthy Marcius, attendupon Cominius to these wars.
It is your former promise.
Sir, it is, and I am constant.
Titus Lartius,
thou shalt see me once morestrike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff?
Stand'st out.
No, Caius Marcius, I'll leanupon one crutch
and fight with t'other, ere staybehind this business.
O, true-bred.
Was ever man so proud as is thisMarcius?
He has no equal.
When we were chosen tribunes forthe people贸
Marked you his lip and eyes?
Nay, but his taunts.
Being moved, he will not spareto gird the gods.
Be-mock the modest moon.
And the present wars devour him.
He is grown too proud to be sovaliant.
Such a nature, tickled with goodsuccess,
disdains the shadow which hetreads on at noon.
But I do wonder his insolence
can brook to be commanded underCominius.
Fame, at the which he aims,
in whom already he's wellgraced,
cannot better be held nor moreattained
than by a place below the first,
for what miscarries shall be thegeneral's fault,
though he perform to the utmostof a man,
and giddy censure will then cryout of Marcius,
"O if he had borne thebusiness."
Besides, if things go well,
opinion that so sticks onMarcius
shall of his demerits robCominius.
So your opinion is, Aufidius,
that they of Rome are entered inour counsels
and know how we proceed.
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought onin this state
that could be brought to bodilyact
ere Rome had circumvention?
"Tis not four days gone since Iheard thence."
These are the words.
I think I have the letter here;yes, here it is.
"They have pressed a power,
"but it is not known whether foreast or west.
"The dearth is great, the peoplemutinous,
"and it is rumored, Cominius,Marcius, your old enemy,
"who is of Rome worse hated thanof you,
"and Titus Lartius, a mostvaliant Roman,
"these three lead on thispreparation whither 'tis bent.
"Most likely, 'tis for you.
Consider of it."
Our army's in the field.
We never yet made doubt but Romewas ready to answer us.
Nor did you think it folly
to keep your great pretensesveiled
till when they needs must showthemselves,
which in the hatching, itseemed,
appeared to Rome.
By the discovery, we shall beshortened in our aim,
which was to take in many towns
ere almost Rome should know wewere afoot.
Noble Aufidius,
take your commission, hie you toyour bands.
Let us alone to guard Corioli.
If they set down before us,
for the remove, bring up yourarmy,
but, I think, you'll findthey've not prepared for us.
O, doubt not that; I speak fromcertainties.
I leave your honors.
If we and Caius Marcius chanceto meet,
'tis sworn between us
we shall ever strike till onecan do no more.
I pray thee, daughter,
sing or express yourself in amore comfortable sort.
If my son were my husband,
I should freelier rejoice inthat absence
wherein he won honor
than in the embracements of hisbed
where he would show most love.
When yet he was buttender-bodied
and the only son of my womb,
when youth with comelinessplucked all gaze his way,
when for a day of kings'entreaties
a mother should not sell him anhour from her beholding,
I, considering how honor wouldbecome such a person,
was pleased to let him seekdanger
where he was like to find fame.
To a cruel war I sent him fromwhence he returned,
his brows bound with oak.
I tell thee, daughter, I sprangnot more in joy
at first hearing he was aman-child
than now in first seeing he'dproved himself a man.
But had he died in the business,madam, how then?
Then his good report should havebeen my son.
I therein would have foundissue.
Hear me profess sincerely:
had I a dozen sons,
each in my love alike and noneless dear
than thine and my good Marcius.
I had rather had eleven dienobly for their country
than one voluptuously surfeitout of action.
Madam, the Lady Valeria is cometo visit you.
Beseech you, give me leave toretire myself.
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither yourhusband's drum.
See him pluck Aufidius down bythe hair,
as children from a bear, theVolsces shunning him.
Methinks I see him stamp thusand call thus:
"Come on, you cowards.
You were got in fear, though youwere born in Rome,"
his bloody brow with his mailedhand then wiping,
forth he goes贸
His bloody brow.
O, Jupiter, no blood.
Away, you fool.
It more becomes a man than gilthis trophy.
The breasts of Hecuba, when shedid suckle Hector,
looked not lovelier thanHector's forehead
when it spit forth blood atGrecian sword, contemning.
Tell Valeria we are fit to bidher welcome.
Heavens bless my lord from fellAufidius.
He'll pluck Aufidius' head belowhis knee
and tread upon his neck.
My ladies both, good day to you.
Sweet madam.
I am glad to see your ladyship.
How do you both?
You are manifest housekeepers.
What are you sewing here?
A fine spot, in good faith.
How does your little son?
I thank your ladyship; well,good madam.
He'd rather see the swords andhear a drum
than look upon his schoolmaster.
On my word, the father's son.
I'll swear, 'tis a very prettyboy.
On my troth,
I looked upon him on Wednesdayhalf an hour together.
Has such a confirmedcountenance.
I saw him run after a gildedbutterfly,
and when he caught it, he let itgo again,
and after it again.
And over and over he comes.
And up again, catched it again.
Or whether his fall enraged him,or how 'twas,
he did so set his teeth and tearit.
O, I warrant, how he mammockedit.
One on 's father's moods.
Indeed; la, 'tis a noble child.
A crack, madam.
Come, lay aside your stitchery.
I must have you play the idlehousewife
with me this afternoon.
No, good madam; I will not outof doors.
Not out of doors.
She shall; she shall.
Indeed, no, by your patience.
I'll not over the threshold
till my lord return from thewars.
Fie, you confine yourself mostunreasonably.
Come, you must go visit the goodlady that lies in.
I will wish her speedy strengthand visit her with my prayers,
but I cannot go thither.
Why, I pray you?
'Tis not to save labor, nor thatI want love.
You would be another Penelope.
Yet, they say, all the yarn shespun in Ulysses' absence
did but fill Ithaca full ofmoths.
Come; I would your cambric weresensible as your finger
that you might leave pricking itfor pity.
Come, you shall go with us.
No, good madam, pardon me.
Indeed, I will not forth.
In truth, la, go with me,
and I'll tell you excellent newsof your husband.
O, good madam, there can be noneyet.
Verily, I do not jest with you.
There came news from him lastnight.
Indeed, madam?
In earnest, it's true; I heard asenator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have anarmy forth,
against whom Cominius thegeneral is gone,
with one part of our Romanpower.
Your lord and Titus Lartius areset down
before their city, Corioli.
They nothing doubt prevailingand to make it brief wars.
This is true, on mine honor.
And so, I pray, go with us.
Give me excuse, good madam.
I will obey you in everythinghereafter.
Let her alone, lady.
As she is now, she will butdisease our better mirth.
In troth, I think she would.
Summon the town.
Tutus Aufidius, is he withinyour walls?
No, nor a man that fears youless than he.
That's lesser than a little.
Hark you; far off.
There is Aufidius.
List what work he makes amongstyour cloven army.
O, they are at it.
Their noise be our instruction.
Ladders, ho!
All the contagion of the southlight on you,
you shames of Rome,
you herd of boils and plagues.
Plaster you o'er that you may beabhorred
farther than seen
and one infect another againstthe wind a mile.
You souls of geese that bear theshapes of men,
how have you run from slavesthat apes would beat.
Pluto and hell.
All hurt behind, backs red andfaces pale
with flight and agued fear.
Mend and charge home or, by thefires of heaven,
I'll leave the foe and make mywars on you.
Look to it.
What is become of Marcius?
Slain, sir, doubtless.
Following the fliers at the veryheels,
with them he enters,
who, upon the sudden, clapped totheir gates.
He is himself alone to answerall the city.
Look, sir.
'Tis Marcius.
Let's fetch him off or makeremain alike.
Come I too late?
The shepherd knows not thunderfrom a tabor
more than I know the sound ofMarcius' tongue
from every meaner man.
Come I too late?
Ay, if you come not in the bloodof others
but mantled in your own.
But how prevailed you?
Will the time serve to tell?
I do not think.
Where is the enemy?
Are you lords of the field?
If not, why cease you till youare so?
Marcius, we have at disadvantagefought
and did retire to win ourpurpose.
I do beseech you,
by all the battles wherein wehave fought,
by the blood we have shedtogether,
by the vows we have made toendure friends,
that you directly set me againstAufidius and his Antiates
and that you not delay thepresent
but, filling the air with swordsadvanced and darts,
we prove this very hour.
Though I could wish you were
conducted to a gentle bath andbalms applied to you,
yet dare I never deny yourasking.
Take your choice of those thatbest can aid your action.
Those are they that most arewilling.
If any such be here as it weresin to doubt
that love this painting whereinyou see me smeared,
if any fear lesser his personthan an ill report,
if any think brave deathoutweighs bad life
and that his country's dearerthan himself,
let him alone, or so many sominded, wave thus
to express his disposition andfollow Marcius.
O, me alone.
Make you a sword of me?
I'll fight with none but thee,
for I do hate thee worse than apromise breaker.
We hate alike.
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhormore than thy fame and envy.
Fix thy foot.
Let the first budger die theother's slave,
and the gods doom him after.
If I fly, Marcius, holloa melike a hare.
Within these three hours,Tullus, alone I fought
in your Corioli walls and madewhat work I pleased.
'Tis not my blood wherein thouseest me masked,
for thy revenge wrench up thypower to the highest.
Wert thou the Hector that wasthe whip of thy bragged progeny.
Thou shouldst not 'scape mehere.
The augurer tells me we shallhave news tonight.
Good or bad?
Not according to the prayers ofthe people,
for they love not Marcius.
Nature teaches beasts to knowtheir friends.
Pray you, who does the wolflove?
The lamb.
Ay, to devour him,
as the hungry plebeians wouldthe noble Marcius.
He's a lamb indeed that baaslike a bear.
He's a bear indeed that liveslike a lamb.
You two are old men.
Tell me one thing that I shallask you.
Well, sir.
In what enormity is Marcius poor
that you two have not inabundance?
He's poor in no one fault butstored with all.
Especially in pride.
Topping all others in boasting.
This is strange now.
Do you two know how you arecensured here in the city,
I mean of us of the right-handfile; do you?
Why, how are we censured?
Because you talk of pride now.
Will you not be angry?
Well, well, sir.
Well?
Why, 'tis no great matter,
for a very little thief ofoccasion will rob you
of a great deal of patience.
Give your dispositions the reinsand be angry at your pleasures,
at the least if you take it as apleasure to you in being so.
You blame Marcius for beingproud?
We do it not alone, sir.
I know you do very little alonefor your helps are many,
or else your actions would growwondrous single.
Your abilities are tooinfant-like
to do much alone.
You talk of pride.
O, that you could turn your eyestoward the napes of your necks
and make but an interior surveyof your good selves.
O, that you could.
What then, sir?
Why, then you should discover abrace of unmeriting, proud,
violent, testy magistrates,alias fools, as any in Rome.
Come, sir, come, we know youwell enough.
You know neither me, yourself,nor anything.
You are ambitious for poorknaves' caps and legs.
You'd wear out a good wholesomeforenoon
hearing a cause
between an orange wife and afosset-seller
and then rejourn the controversyof three pence
to a second day of audience.
But when you're hearing a matterbetween party and party,
if you chance to be pinched withthe colic,
you make faces like mummers,
set up the bloody flag againstall patience,
and, in roaring for a chamberpot,
dismiss the controversy bleedingthe more entangled
by your hearing.
All the peace you make in theircause
is calling both the partiesknaves.
You are a pair of strange ones.
God-den to your worships.
More of your conversation wouldinfect my brain,
being the herdsmen of thebeastly plebeians.
I'll be bold to take my leave ofyou.
If I should tell thee over thisthy day's work,
thou'd not believe thy deeds.
But I'll report it
where senators shall mingletears with smiles,
where great patricians shallattend and shrug,
in the end admire,
where ladies shall be frighted,and, gladly quaked, hear more,
where the dull tribunes that,with the fusty plebeians,
hate thine honors, shall sayagainst their hearts,
"We thank the gods our Rome hathsuch a soldier."
Pray now, no more.
My mother, who has a charter toextol her blood,
when she does praise me, grievesme.
I have done as you have done,that's what I can,
induced as you have been, that'sfor my country.
He that has but effected hisgood will
hath overta'en mine act.
You shall not be the grave ofyour deserving.
Rome must know the value of herown.
Therefore, I beseech you, insign of what you are,
not to reward what you have donebefore our army hear me.
I have some wounds upon me andthey smart
to hear themselves remembered.
Should they not,
well might they fester againstingratitude
and tent themselves with death.
Of all the treasure in thisfield achieved and city,
we render you the tenth to betaken forth
before the common distributionat your only choice.
I thank you, General,
but cannot make my heart consentto take a bribe to pay my sword.
I do refuse it and stand upon mycommon part
with those that have beheld thedoing.
May these same instruments,
which you profane, never soundmore!
When drums and trumpets shall inthe field prove flatterers,
let courts and cities all bemade of false-faced soothing!
For that I have not washed mynose that bled
or foiled some debile wretch
which, without note, here's manyelse have done.
You shout me forth inacclamations hyperbolical,
as if I loved my little shouldbe dieted
in praises sauced with lies.
Too modest are you,
more cruel to your good report
than grateful to us that giveyou truly.
By your patience, if againstyourself you be incensed,
we'll put you,
like one that means his properharm,
in manacles, then reason safelywith you.
Therefore, be it known, as tous, to all the world,
that Caius Marcius wears thiswar's garland,
and from this time, for what hedid before Corioli,
call him, with all the applauseand clamor of the host,
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
Coriolanus!
Bear the addition nobly ever.
I will go wash,
and when my face is fair,
you shall perceive whether Iblush or no.
The gods begin to mock me.
I, that now refused mostprincely gifts,
am bound to beg of my lordgeneral.
Take it; 'tis yours.
What is it?
I sometime lay here in Corioliat a poor man's house.
He used me kindly.
He cried to me.
I saw him prisoner.
But then Aufidius was within myview,
and wrath o'erwhelmed my pity.
I request you to give my poorhost freedom.
O, well begged.
Were he the butcher of my son,
he should be free as is thewind.
Deliver him, Titus.
Marcius, his name?
By Jupiter, forgot.
I am weary.
Yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?
The town is ta'en.
'Twill be delivered back on goodcondition.
Condition.
I would I were a Roman,
for I cannot, being a Volsce, bethat I am.
Condition.
What good condition can a treatyfind
in the part that is at mercy?
Five times, Marcius, I've foughtwith thee.
So often hast thou beat me andwouldst do so, I think,
should we encounter as often aswe eat.
By the elements, if e'er again Imeet him beard to beard,
he's mine,
or I am his.
Mine emulation hath not thathonor in it it had
for where I thought to crush himin an equal force.
True sword to sword,
I'll potch at him some way
or wrath or craft may get him.
He is the devil.
Bolder, though not so subtle.
My valor's poisoned with onlysuffering stain by him,
for him shall fly out of itself.
Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
being naked, sick, nor fane norcapitol,
the prayers of priests nor timesof sacrifice,
embarquements all of fury,
shall lift up their rottenprivilege
and custom against my hate toMarcius.
Where I find him,
were it at home, upon mybrother's guard,
even there, against thehospitable canon,
would I wash my fierce hand inhis heart.
How now, my as fair as nobleladies?
And the moon, were she earthly,no nobler.
Whither do you follow your eyesso fast?
Honorable Menenius, my boyMarcius approaches.
For the love of Juno, let's go.
Marcius coming home?
Ay, worthy Menenius, and withmost prosperous approbation.
Take my cap, Jupiter, and Ithank thee.
Marcius coming home!
Nay, 'tis true.
Is he not wounded?
He was wont to come homewounded.
O, no, no, no.
O, he is wounded.
I thank the gods for it.
So do I too, and it be not toomuch,
brings a victory in his pocket?
The wounds become him.
On's brows, Menenius,
he comes the third time homewith the oaken garland.
Has he disciplined Aufidiussoundly?
Titus Lartius writes they foughttogether,
but Aufidius got off.
And 'twas time for him too, I'llwarrant him that.
And he had stayed by him,
I would not be so fidiused forall the chests in Corioli
and the gold that's in them.
Is the senate possessed of this?
Good ladies, let's go.
Yes, yes, yes.
The senate has letters from thegeneral
in which he gives my son thewhole name of the war.
He has in this action outdonehis former deeds doubly.
In troth, there's wondrousthings spoke of him.
Wondrous.
Ay, I warrant you,
and not without his truepurchasing.
The gods grant them true.
True.
Pow, wow.
True; I'll be sworn they aretrue.
Where is he wounded?
In the shoulder and in the leftarm.
There will be large cicatricesto show the people
when he shall stand for hisplace.
He received in the repulse ofTarquin
seven hurts in the body.
One in the neck; two in thethigh.
That's nine that I know.
He had, before this lastexpedition,
25 wounds upon him.
Now it is 27.
Every gash an enemy's grave.
Hark, the trumpets.
These are the ushers of Marcius.
Before him he carries noise, andbehind him he leaves tears.
Death, that dark spirit, in hisnervy arm doth lie,
which, being advanced, declines,and then men die.
Know, Rome, that all alone
Marcius did fight within Corioligates,
where he hath won, with fame, aname to Caius Marcius.
These in honor followsCoriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renownedCoriolanus.
No more of this.
It does offend my heart.
Pray now, no more.
Look, sir, your mother.
O, you have, I know, petitionedall the gods for my prosperity.
Nay, my good soldier, up.
My gentle Marcius,
worthy Caius,
and by deed-achieving honornewly named贸
What is it?
Coriolanus must I call thee?
But O, thy wife.
My gracious silence,
hail.
Wouldst thou have laughed had Icome coffined home,
that weepest to see me triumph?
Ah, my dear, such eyes thewidows in Corioli wear,
and mothers that lack sons.
Now, the gods crown thee.
And live you yet?
O, sweet lady, pardon.
I know not where to turn.
O, welcome home.
Welcome, General.
And you're welcome all.
100,000 welcomes.
I could weep, and I could laugh.
I am light and heavy.
Welcome.
The good patricians must bevisited,
from whom I have received notonly greetings,
but with them change of honors.
I have lived to see inherited myvery wishes
and the buildings of my fancy.
Only there's one thing wanting,
which I doubt not but our Romewill cast upon thee.
Know, good mother, I had ratherbe their servant in my way
than sway with them in theirs.
On the sudden, I warrant himconsul.
Then our office may, during hispower, go sleep.
He cannot temperately transporthis honors
from where he should begin andend,
but will lose those he hath won.
In that, there's comfort.
Doubt not the commoners, withwhom we stand,
but they upon their ancientmalice
will forget with the least causethese his new honors,
which that he will give them
make I as little question as heis proud to do it.
I heard him swear, were he tostand for consul,
never would he appear in themarketplace,
nor on him put the naplessvesture of humility,
nor showing, as the manner is,
his wounds to the people, begtheir stinking breaths.
'Tis right.
It was his word.
O, he would miss it rather thancarry it
but by the suit of the gentry tohim
and the desire of the nobles.
I wish no better than have himhold that purpose
and to put it in execution.
'Tis most like he will.
It shall be to him then as ourgood wills a sure destruction.
So it must fall out to him
or our authorities for an end.
We must suggest to the people
in what hatred he still hathheld them,
that to his power he would havemade them mules,
silenced their pleaders
and dispropertied theirfreedoms,
holding them, in human actionand capacity,
of no more soul nor fitness forthe world than...
Camels in the war?
Camels in the war
who have their provand only forbearing burdens
and sore blows for sinking underthem.
This, as you say, suggested atsome time
when his soaring insolence shalltouch the people贸
which time shall not want, if hebe put upon it,
and that's as easy as to setdogs on sheep贸
will be his fire to kindle theirdry stubble,
and their blaze shall darken himforever.
What's the matter?
You are sent for to the capitol.
'Tis thought that Marcius shallbe consul.
I have seen the dumb men throngto see him
and the blind to hear him speak.
Matrons flung gloves,
ladies and maids their scarfsand handkerchiefs
upon him as he passed.
The nobles bended as to Jove'sstatue,
and the commons made a showerand thunder
with their caps and shouts.
I never saw the like.
Having determined of the Volscesand to send for Titus Lartius,
it remains, as the main point inthis our after-meeting,
to gratify his noble service
that hath thus stood for hiscountry.
Therefore, please you, mostreverend and grave elders,
to desire the present consul,
and last general in ourwell-found successes,
to report a little of the worthywork performed
by Caius Marcius Coriolanus,
whom we met here both to thank
and to remember with honors likehimself.
Speak, good Cominius.
Leave nothing out for length,
and make us think rather ourstate's defective
for requital than we to stretchit out.
Masters of the people, we dorequest your kindest ears,
and after, your loving motiontoward the common body
to yield what passes here.
We are convented upon a pleasingtreaty
and have hearts inclinable
to honor and advance the themeof our assembly.
Which the rather we shall beblessed to do,
if he remember a kinder value ofthe people
than he hath hereto prized themat.
That's off; that's off.
I would you rather had beensilent.
Please you to hear Cominiusspeak?
Most willingly, but yet mycaution was more pertinent
than the rebuke you give it.
He loves your people
but tie him not to be theirbedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.
Sit, Coriolanus;
never shame to hear what youhave nobly done.
Your honor's pardon.
I'd rather have my wounds toheal again
than hear say how I got them.
Sir, I hope my words disbenchedyou not.
No, sir.
Yet oft, when blows have made mestay,
I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurtnot.
But your people, I love them asthey weigh.
Pray now, sit down.
I had rather have one scratch myhead in the sun
when the alarum were struck
than idly sit to hear mynothings monstered.
Proceed, Cominius.
I shall lack voice.
The deeds of Coriolanus shouldnot be uttered feebly.
It is held that valor is thechiefest virtue
and most dignifies the haver.
If it be, the man I speak of
cannot in the world be singlycounterpoised.
At 16 years, when Tarquin made ahead for Rome,
he fought beyond the mark ofothers.
Our then dictator,
whom with all praise I point at,saw him fight,
when with his Amazonian chin
he drove the bristled lipsbefore him.
He bestrid an o'er-pressed Roman
and in the consul's view slewthree opposers.
Tarquin's self he met and struckhim on his knee.
In that day's feats,
when he might act the woman inthe scene,
he proved best man in the field,
and for his meed was brow-boundwith the oak.
His pupil age man-entered, thus,he waxed like a sea,
and in the brunt of 17 battlessince,
he lurched all swords of thegarland.
For this last,
before and in Corioli,
let me say, I cannot speak himhome.
He stopped the fliers
and, by his rare example,
made the coward turn terror intosport.
As weeds before a vessel undersail,
so men obeyed and fell below hisstem.
His sword, death's stamp whereit did mark, it took.
From face to foot, he was athing of blood
whose every motion was timedwith dying cries.
Alone he entered the mortal gateof the city,
which he painted with shunlessdestiny,
aidless came off
and with a sudden reinforcementstruck Corioli like a planet.
Now all's his.
When, by and by, the din of wargan pierce his ready sense,
then straight his doubledspirit,
re-quickened what in flesh wasfatigate,
and to the battle came he,
where he did run reeking overthe lives of men
as if 'twere a perpetual spoil.
And till we called both fieldand city ours,
he never stood to ease hisbreast with panting.
Worthy man.
He cannot but with measure fitthe honors
which we devise him.
Our spoils he kicked at andlooked upon things precious
as they were the common muck ofthe world.
He covets less than miseryitself would give,
rewards his deeds with doingthem,
and is content to spend the timeto end it.
He's right noble.
Let him be called for.
Call Coriolanus.
The senate, Coriolanus,
are well pleased to make theeconsul.
I do owe them still my life andservices.
It then remains that you dospeak to the people.
I do beseech you, let meo'erleap that custom,
for I cannot put on the gown,stand naked and entreat them
for my wounds' sake to givetheir suffrage.
Please you that I may pass thisdoing.
Sir, the people must have theirvoices,
neither will they bate one jotof ceremony.
Put them not to it.
Pray you, go fit you to thecustom and take to you,
as your predecessors have, yourhonor with your form.
It is apart that I shall blushin acting
and might well be taken from thepeople.
Mark you that?
To brag unto them, thus I did,and thus,
to show them the unaching scarswhich I should hide
as if I had received them
for the hire of their breathonly.
Do not stand upon it.
We recommend to you, tribunes ofthe people,
our purpose to them,
and to our noble consul wish weall joy and honor.
Once, if he do require ourvoices,
we ought not to deny him.
We may, sir, if we will.
We have power in ourselves to doit,
but it is a power that we haveno power to do,
for if he show us his wounds andtell us his deeds,
we are to put our tongues intothose wounds
and speak for them.
So if he tell us his nobledeeds,
we must also tell him our nobleacceptance of them.
Ingratitude is monstrous,
and for the multitude to beingrateful
were to make a monster of themultitude,
of the which we being members,
should bring ourselves to bemonstrous members.
And to make us no better thoughtof, a little help will serve,
for once we stood up about thecorn,
he himself stuck not to call usthe many-headed multitude.
We have been called so of many;
not that our head are somebrown, some black,
some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are sodiversely colored.
And truly, I think,
if all our wits were to issueout of one skull,
they would fly east, west,north, south,
and their consent of one directway
should be at once to all thepoints of the compass.
Think you so?
Which way do you judge my witwould fly?
Nay, your wit will not so soonout as another man's will.
'Tis strongly wedged up in ablockhead,
but if it were at liberty,'twould, sure, southward.
Why that way?
To lose itself in a fog,
where being three parts meltedaway with rotten dews,
the fourth would return forconscience sake
to help to get thee a wife.
You are never without yourtricks.
O, you may, you may.
Are you all resolved to giveyour voices?
- No - Yes.
But that's no matter; thegreater part carries it.
I say, if he would incline tothe people,
there never was a worthier man.
Here he comes,
and in the gown of humility.
Mark his behavior.
We are not to stay all together
but to come by him where hestands,
by ones, by twos, by threes.
He's to make his requests byparticulars.
Have you not known the worthiestmen have done it?
What must I say?
"I pray, sir"贸
plague upon it.
I cannot bring my tongue to sucha pace.
"Look, sir, my wounds.
"I got them in my country'sservice,
"when some certain of yourbrethren
roared and ran from the noise ofour own drums."
O, me, the gods.
You must not speak of that.
You must desire them to thinkupon you.
Think upon me?
Hang them.
I would they would forget me,
like the virtues which ourdivines lose by them.
You'll mar all.
I'll leave you.
Pray you, speak to them, I prayyou, in wholesome manner.
Bid them wash their faces andkeep their teeth clean.
So here comes a brace.
You know the cause, sir, of mystanding here.
We do, sir.
Tell us what hath brought you toit.
Mine own desert.
Your own desert.
Ay, but not mine own desire.
How not your own desire?
No, sir, 'twas never my desire
yet to trouble the poor withbegging.
You must think, if we give youany thing,
we hope to gain by you.
Well, then, I pray, your priceof the consulship?
The price is to ask it kindly.
Kindly, sir.
I pray, let me have it.
I have wounds to show you,
which shall be yours in private.
Your good voice, sir.
What say you?
You shall have it, worthy sir.
A match, sir.
There's in all two worthy voicesbegged.
I have your alms.
Adieu.
But this is something odd.
An 'twere to give again贸
'tis no matter.
Pray you now,
if it may stand with the tune ofyour voices
that I may be consul,
I have here the customary gown.
You have deserved nobly of yourcountry,
and you have not deserved nobly.
Your enigma?
You have been a scourge to herenemies;
you have been a rod to herfriends.
You have not indeed loved thecommon people.
You should account me the morevirtuous
that I have not been common inmy love.
I will, sir, flatter my swornbrother, the people,
to earn a dearer estimation ofthem.
'Tis a condition they accountgentle,
and since the wisdom of theirchoice
is rather to have my hat than myheart,
I will, sir, practice theinsinuating nod
and be off to them mostcounterfeitly.
That is, sir, I will counterfeit
the bewitchment of some popularman
and give it bountiful to thedesirers.
Therefore, beseech you, I may beconsul.
We hope to find you our friend
and therefore give you ourvoices heartily.
You have received many woundsfor your country.
I will not seal your knowledgewith showing them.
I will make much of your voices,and so trouble you no further.
The gods give you joy, sir,heartily.
Most sweet voices.
Better it is to die,
better to starve,
than crave the hire which firstwe do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge shouldI stand here
to beg of Hob and Dick,
that does appear, their needlessvouches?
Custom calls me to it.
What custom wills, in all thingsshould we do it,
the dust on antique time wouldlie unswept
and mountainous error be toohighly heapt
for truth to over-peer.
Rather than fool it so,
let the high office and thehonor
go to one that would do thus.
I am half through.
The one part suffered; the otherwill I do.
Here come more voices.
Your voices.
For your voices, I have fought,
watched for your voices,
for your voices bear of woundstwo dozen odd,
battles thrice six I have seenand heard of,
for your voices have done manythings,
some less, some more;
your voices.
Indeed, I would be consul.
He has done nobly
and cannot go without any honestman's voice.
Therefore, let him be consul.
Amen.
God save thee, noble consul.
Worthy voices.
You have stood your limitation,
and the tribunes endue you withthe people's voice.
Remains that, in the officialmarks invested,
you anon do meet the senate.
Is this done?
The custom of request you havedischarged.
The people do admit you and aresummoned to meet anon
upon your approbation.
Where, at the senate house?
- There, Coriolanus. - May Ichange these garments?
You may, sir.
That I'll straight do, and,knowing myself again,
repair to the senate house.
I'll keep you company.
He has it now,
and by his looks, methinks 'tiswarm at his heart.
With a proud heart he wore hishumble weeds.
Will you dismiss the people?
How now, my masters?
Have you chose this man?
He has our voices, sir.
To my poor unworthy notice,
he mocked us when he begged ourvoices.
Certainly, he flouted usdownright.
No, 'tis his kind of speech.
He did not mock us.
Not one amongst us, saveyourself,
but says he used us scornfully.
He should have showed us hismarks of merit,
wounds received for his country.
Why, so he did, I'm sure.
No, no;
no man saw them.
He said he had wounds, which hecould show in private.
And with his hat, thus waving itin scorn,
"I would be consul," says he.
"Aged custom, but by yourvoices,
"will not so permit me.
Your voices therefore."
When we granted that, here was,
"I thank you for your voices.
"Thank you for your most sweetvoices.
Now you have left your voices, Ihave no further with you."
Was not this mockery?
Why either were you ignorant tosee it, or, seeing it,
of such childish friendliness toyield your voices?
Did you perceive he did solicityou in free contempt
when he did need your loves,
and do you think that hiscontempt
shall not be bruising to you,
when he hath power to crush?
Why had your bodies no heartamong you?
Or had you tongues to cry
against the rectorship ofjudgment?
Have you ere now denied theasker?
And now again of him that didnot ask but mock,
bestow your sued-for tongues?
He's not confirmed.
We may deny him yet.
And will deny him.
I'll have 500 voices of thatsound.
Let them assemble, and on asafer judgment,
all revoke your ignorantelection.
Tullus Aufidius then had madenew head?
He had, my lord,
and that it was which caused ourswifter composition.
So then the Volsces stand but asat first,
ready, when time shall promptthem,
to make road upon us again.
They are worn, lord consul,
so that we shall hardly in ourages
see their banners wave again.
Saw you Aufidius?
On safeguard he came to me
and did curse against theVolsces,
for they had so vilely yieldedthe town.
He's retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
He did, my lord.
How; what?
How often he had met you, swordto sword;
that of all things upon theearth,
he hated your person most;
that he would pawn all hisfortunes
to hopeless restitution
so he might be called yourvanquisher.
At Antium lives he?
At Antium.
I wish I had a cause to seek himthere
to oppose his hatred fully.
Welcome home.
Behold, these are the tribunesof the people,
the tongues of common mouth.
I do despise them for they doprank them in authority
against all noble sufferance.
Pass no further.
Ha, what is that?
It will be dangerous to go on.
No further.
What makes this change?
The matter?
Hath he not passed the noble andthe common?
Cominius, no.
Have I had children's voices?
Tribunes, give way; he shall tothe marketplace.
The people are incensed againsthim.
Stop or all will fall in broil.
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices that canyield them now
and straight disclaim theirtongues?
What are your offices?
You being their mouths, why ruleyou not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?
Be calm; be calm.
It is a purposed thing and growsby plot
to curb the will of thenobility.
Suffer it and live with such ascannot rule
nor ever will be ruled.
Call it not a plot.
The people cry you mocked them,
and of late, when corn was giventhem gratis,
you repined,
scandaled the suppliants for thepeople,
called them time-pleasers,flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Why, this was known before.
Not to them all.
Have you informed them sithence?
How I inform them?
You are like to do suchbusiness.
Not unlike, each way, to betteryours.
Why then should I be consul?
By yond clouds, let me deserveso ill as you
and make me your fellow tribune.
You show too much of that forwhich the people stir.
If you will pass to where youare bound,
you must inquire your way,
which you are out of, with agentler spirit,
or never be so noble as aconsul,
nor yoke with him for tribune.
Let's be calm.
The people are abused, set on.
This paltering becomes not Rome,
nor hath Coriolanus deservedthis so dishonored rub
laid falsely in the plain way ofhis merit.
Tell me of corn.
This was my speech, and I willspeak it again贸
Not now; not now.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
Now, as I live, I will.
My nobler friends, I crave theirpardon.
For the mutable, rank-scentedmany,
let them regard me as I do notflatter
and therein behold themselves.
I say, again, in soothing them,
we nourish against our senatethe cockle of rebellion,
insolence, sedition,
which we ourselves have ploughedfor, sowed, and scattered,
by mingling them with us, thehonored number,
who lack not virtue, no, norpower,
but that which they have givento beggars.
Well, no more.
No more words, we beseech you.
How no more?
As for my country, I have shedmy blood,
not fearing outward force,
so shall my lungs coin words
till their decay against thosemeasles,
which we disdain, should tatterus,
yet sought the very way to catchthem.
You speak of the people as ifyou were a god to punish,
not a man of their infirmity.
'Twere well we let the peopleknow it.
What; what?
His choler?
Choler.
Were I as patient as themidnight sleep,
by Jove, 'twould be my mind.
It is a mind that shall remain apoison where it is,
not poison any further.
Shall remain?
Hear you this, Triton of theminnows.
Mark you his absolute "shall"?
'Twas from the canon.
"Shall"?
O, good but most unwisepatricians.
Why, you grave but recklesssenators,
have you thus given Hydra hereto choose an officer,
that with his peremptory"shall,"
being but the horn and noise ofthe monster's,
wants not spirit to say
he'll turn your current in aditch
and make your channel his?
If he have power, then vail yourignorance;
if none, awake your dangerouslenity.
You are plebeians if they besenators,
and they are no less when, bothyour voices blended,
the greatest taste most palatestheirs.
They choose their magistrate,
and such a one as he who putshis "shall,"
his popular "shall,"
against a graver bench than everfrowned in Greece.
By Jove himself, it makes theconsuls base.
And my soul aches to know
when two authorities are up,neither supreme,
how soon confusion may enter'twixt the gap of both
and take the one by the other.
Well, on to the marketplace.
Whoever gave that counsel,
to give forth the corn of thestorehouse gratis,
as 'twas used sometime inGreece贸
Well, well, no more of that.
Though there the people had moreabsolute power, I say,
they nourished disobedience andfed the ruin of the state.
Why shall the people give onethat speaks thus their voice?
I'll give my reasons, moreworthier than their voices.
They know the corn was not ourrecompense,
resting well assured they ne'erdid service for it.
Being pressed to the war,
even when the navel of the statewas touched,
they would not thread the gate.
This kind of service did notdeserve corn gratis.
Being in the war, their mutiniesand revolts,
wherein they showed most valor,spoke not for them.
Well, what then?
How shall this bosom multiplieddigest the senate's courtesy?
Let deeds express what's like tobe their words.
"We did request it.
"We are the greater poll, and intrue fear,
they gave us our demand."
Thus we debase the nature of ourseat
and make the rabble call ourcares fears,
which will in time break ope'the locks of the senate
and bring in the crows to peckthe eagles.
Come, enough.
Enough with over-measure.
No, take more.
What may be sworn by both divineand human
seal what I end withal.
This double worship,
where one part does disdain withcause,
the other insult without allreason,
where gentry, title, wisdom,
cannot conclude
but by the yea and no of generalignorance.
It must omit real necessities
and give way the while tounstable slightness.
Purpose so barred, it follows,nothing is done to purpose.
Therefore, beseech you,
you that will be less fearfulthan discreet,
that love the fundamental partof state
more than you doubt the changeon it,
that prefer a noble life beforea long,
that wish to jump a body with adangerous physic
that's sure of death without it,
at once pluck out themultitudinous tongue.
Let them not lick the sweetwhich is their poison.
Your dishonor mangles truejudgment
and bereaves the state of thatintegrity
which should become it,
not having the power to do thegood it would,
for the ill which doth controlit.
Has said enough.
Hath spoken like a traitor andshall answer as traitors do.
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelmthee.
What should the people do withthese bald tribunes
on whom depending,
their obedience fails to thegreater bench?
In a rebellion, when what's notmeet,
but what must be was law, thenwere they chosen.
In a better hour,
let what is meet be said it mustbe meet,
and throw their power i' thedust.
Manifest treason.
This a consul?
No.
Aediles, ho.
Go, call the people,
in whose name myself attach theeas a traitorous innovator,
a foe to the public weal.
Obey, I charge thee, and followto thine answer.
Hence, old goat.
Hence, rotten thing,
or I'll shake thy bones out ofthy garments.
Help, ye citizens!
Here's he that would take fromyou all your power.
Seize him, aediles.
Down with him!
Hear me.
Hear me, people; peace.
You are at point to lose yourliberties.
Marcius would have all from you,
Marcius, whom late you havenamed for consul.
Fie, fie, fie.
This is the way to kindle not toquench.
To unbuild the city and to layall flat.
What is the city but the people?
True, the people are the city.
By the consent of all,
we were established the people'smagistrates.
You so remain.
And so are like to do.
That is the way to lay the cityflat,
to bring the roof to thefoundation and bury all,
which yet distinctly ranges inheaps and piles of ruin.
This deserves death.
Or let us stand to ourauthority,
or let us lose it.
We do here pronounce, upon thepart of the people,
in whose power we were electedtheirs,
Marcius is worthy of presentdeath.
Therefore lay hold of him,
bear him to the rock Tarpeian,
and from thence into destructioncast him!
Aediles, seize him.
Beseech you, tribunes!
Hear me but a word.
Be that you seem truly yourcountry's friend,
and temperately proceed
in what you would thus violentlyredress.
Sir, those cold ways that seemlike prudent helps
are very poisonous where thedisease is violent.
Lay hands upon him and bear himto the rock.
No.
I'll die here.
There's some among you havebeheld me fighting.
Come;
try upon yourselves what youhave seen me.
Down with that sword.
Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
Go, get you to your house; begone.
Come, sir, along with us.
I would they were barbarians asthey are,
though in Rome littered notRomans as they are not,
though calved in the porch ofthe Capitol
Be gone.
Put not your worthy rage intoyour tongue.
One time will owe another.
On fair ground, I could beat 40of them.
Please, you, be gone.
I'll try whether my old wit bein request
with those that have but little.
This must be patched with clothof any color.
Nay, come away.
This man has marred his fortune.
Where is this viper that woulddepopulate the city
and be every man himself?
You worthy tribunes贸
He shall be thrown down theTarpeian rock
with rigorous hands.
He hath resisted law,
and therefore law shall scornhim further trial
than the severity of the publicpower
which he so sets at nought.
Sir, sir, do not cry havoc
where you should but hunt withmodest warrant.
Sir, how comes it that you haveholp to make this rescue?
Hear me speak.
As I do know the consul'sworthiness,
so can I name his faults贸
Consul; what consul?
The consul Coriolanus.
He consul?
If, by the tribunes' leave, andyours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave aword or two,
the which shall turn you to nofurther harm
than so much loss of time.
Speak briefly then,
for we are peremptory todispatch
this viperous traitor.
To eject him hence were but ourdanger
and to keep him here our certaindeath.
Therefore, it is decreed, hedies tonight.
Now the good gods forbid thatour renowned Rome,
whose gratitude towards herdeserved children
is enrolled in Jove's own book,
like an unnatural dam should noweat up her own.
He's a disease that must be cutaway.
O, he's a limb that has but adisease.
This is clean kam.
We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house andpluck him thence
lest his infection, being ofcatching nature,
spread further.
One word more.
One word.
This tiger-footed rage,
when it shall find the harm ofunscanned swiftness,
will too late tie leaden poundsto his heels.
Proceed by process.
Lest parties, as he is beloved,break out
and sack great Rome with Romans.
If it were so
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of hisobedience?
Our aediles smote?
Ourselves resisted?
Come.
Consider this.
He has been bred in the warssince he could draw a sword
and is ill schooled in boltedlanguage.
Meal and bran together he throwswithout distinction.
Give me leave.
I'll go to him
and undertake to bring him wherehe shall answer,
by a lawful form, in peace, tohis utmost peril.
Noble tribunes, it is the humaneway.
The other course will prove toobloody
and the end of it unknown to thebeginning.
Noble Menenius, be you then asthe people's officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.
Go not home.
Meet on the marketplace.
We'll attend you there
where if you bring not Marcius,
we'll proceed in our first way.
I'll bring him to you.
Let them pull all about mineears,
present me death on the wheel orat wild horses' heels,
or pile ten hills on theTarpeian rock
that the precipitation
might down stretch below thebeam of sight,
yet will I still be thus tothem.
Why did you wish me milder?
Would you have me false to mynature?
Rather say I play the man I am.
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put yourpower well on
before you'd worn it out.
Let go.
You might have been enough theman you are
with striving less to be so.
Lesser had been the thwartingsof your dispositions
if you'd not showed them how youwere disposed
ere they lacked power to crossyou.
Let them hang.
Ay, and burn too.
Come, come, you have been toorough, something too rough.
You must return and mend it.
There's no remedy, unless, bynot so doing,
our good city cleave in themidst and perish.
O, pray, be counseled.
I have a heart as little apt asyours
but yet a brain
that leads my use of anger tobetter vantage.
Well said, noble woman.
Before he should thus stoop tothe herd
but that the violent fit of thetime
craves it as physic for thewhole state,
I would put mine armor on, whichI can scarcely bear.
What must I do?
Return to the tribunes.
Well, what then; what then?
Repent what you have spoke.
For them?
I cannot do it to the gods; mustI then do it to them?
You are too absolute;
though therein you can never betoo noble
but when extremities speak.
I have heard you say honor andpolicy,
like unsevered friends,
in the war do grow together.
Grant that, and tell me in peace
what each of them by the otherlose
that they combine not there.
Tush, tush.
A good demand.
If it be honor in your wars toseem the same you are not,
which, for your best ends, youadopt your policy,
how is it less or worse that itshould hold
companionship in peace withhonor, as in war,
since that to both it stands inlike request?
Why force you this?
Because that now it lies you onto speak to the people,
not by your own instruction,
nor by the matter which yourheart prompts you,
but with such words that are butrooted in your tongue,
though but bastards andsyllables of no allowance
to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonors youat all
than to take in a town withgentle words
which else would put you to yourfortune
and the hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my naturewhere my fortunes
and my friends at stake requiredI should do so in honor.
I am in this your wife,
your son, these senators, thenobles.
And you will rather show ourgeneral louts
how you can frown than spend afawn upon them
for the inheritance of theirloves
and safeguard of what that wantmight ruin.
Noble lady.
Come, go with us; speak fair.
You may salve so not what isdangerous present,
but the loss of what is past.
I prithee now, my son,
go to them with thy bonnet inthy hand,
and thus far having stretchedit,
here be with them.
This but done, even as shespeaks,
why, their hearts were yours.
Here is Cominius.
I have been in the marketplace,
and, sir, 'tis fit you makestrong party
or defend yourself by calmnessor by absence.
All's in anger.
Only fair speech.
I think 'twill serve,
if he can thereto frame hisspirit.
He must and will.
Prithee now; say you will and goabout it.
Must I go show them my unbarbedsconce?
Must I, with my base tongue,give to my noble heart
a lie that it must bear?
Well, I will do it.
But were there but this singleplot to lose,
this mold of Marcius,
they to dust should grind it andthrow it against the wind.
To the marketplace.
You have put me now to such apart
that never shall I discharge tothe life.
Come, come; we'll prompt you.
I prithee now, my son, as thouhast said,
my praises made thee first asoldier,
so to have my praise for this,
perform a part thou hast notdone before.
Well, I must do it.
Away, my disposition.
Possess me some harlot's spirit.
My throat of war be turned,
which, quired with my drum, intoa pipe small as an eunuch
or the virgin voice that babieslull asleep.
The smiles of knaves tent in mycheeks,
and schoolboys' tears take upthe glasses of my sight.
I will not do it,
lest I surcease to honor mineown truth
and by my body's action
teach my mind a most inherentbaseness.
At thy choice then.
To beg of thee,
it is my more disgrace than thouof them.
Come all to ruin.
Let thy mother rather feel thypride
than fear thy dangerousstoutness,
for I mock at death with as bigheart as thou.
Do as thou list.
Thy valiantness was mine.
Thou suck'dst it from me.
But owe thy pride thyself.
Pray, be content.
Mother, I am going to themarketplace.
Chide me no more.
I'll mountebank their loves andcog their hearts from them
and come home beloved of all thetrades in Rome.
Look, I am going.
Commend me to my wife.
I'll return consul,
or never trust to what my tonguecan do
i' the way of flattery further.
Do your will.
In this point charge him home,
that he affects tyrannicalpower.
If he evade us there,
enforce him with his envy to thepeople,
and that the spoil got on theAntiates
was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?
- He's coming. - Howaccompanied?
With old Menenius
and those senators that alwaysfavored him.
Have you a catalog of all thevoices
that we have procured set downby the poll?
I have; 'tis ready.
Have you collected them bytribes?
I have.
Assemble presently the peoplehither,
and when they hear me say,
"It shall be so in the right andstrength of the commons,"
be it either for death, forfine, or banishment,
then let them,
if I say fine, cry "Fine," ifdeath, cry "Death,"
insisting on the old prerogative
and power in the truth of thecause.
I shall inform them.
And when such time they havebegun to cry,
let them not cease,
but with a din confused enforcethe present execution
of what we chance to sentence.
Very well.
Make them be strong and readyfor this hint
when we shall hap to give itthem.
Go about it.
Put him to choler straight.
He hath been used ever toconquer
and to have his worth ofcontradiction.
Being once chafed,
he cannot be reined again totemperance.
Then he speaks what's in hisheart,
and that is there which lookswith us to break his neck.
Well, here he comes.
Calmly, I do beseech you.
Ay, as an ostler, that for thepoorest piece
will bear the knave by thevolume.
The honored gods keep Rome insafety,
her chairs of justice suppliedwith worthy men,
plant love among us,
and throng our large templeswith the shows of peace
and not our streets with war.
Amen, amen.
A noble wish.
Shall I be charged no furtherthan this present?
Must all determine here?
I do demand,
if you submit you to thepeople's voices,
allow their officers,
and are content to suffer lawfulcensure
for such faults as shall beproved upon you?
I...
am content.
Lo, citizens, he says he iscontent.
The warlike service he has done,consider.
Think upon the wounds his bodybears,
which show like graves in theholy churchyard.
Scratches with briers;
scars to move laughter only.
Consider further that when hespeaks not like a citizen,
you find him like a soldier.
Do not take his rougher accentsfor malicious sounds,
but, as I say,
such as become a soldier ratherthan envy you.
What is the matter
that being passed for consulwith full voice,
I am so dishonored
that the very hour you take itoff again?
Answer to us.
Say, then.
'Tis true.
I ought so.
We charge you that you
have contrived to take from Romeall seasoned office
and to wind yourself into apower tyrannical,
for which you are a traitor tothe people.
How, traitor?
Nay, temperately; your promise.
The fires i' the lowest hellfold in the people.
Call me their traitor.
Thou injurious tribune.
Within thine eyes sat 20,000deaths,
in thy hands clutched as manymillions,
in thy lying tongue bothnumbers.
I would say, "Thou liest," untothee
with a voice as free as I dopray the gods.
Mark you this, people?
We need not put new matter tohis charge.
What you have seen him do andheard him speak,
beating your officers, cursingyourselves,
opposing laws with strokes
and here defying those whosegreat power must try him;
even this, so criminal and insuch capital kind,
deserves the extremest death.
But since he hath served wellfor Rome贸
What do you prate of service?
I talk of that that know it.
You?
Is this the promise that youmade your mother?
- Know, I pray you - I'll knowno further.
Let them pronounce the steepTarpeian death,
vagabond exile, flaying,
pent to linger but with a graina day.
I would not buy their mercy atthe price of one fair word.
For that he has, as much as inhim lies,
from time to time envied againstthe people,
seeking means to pluck awaytheir power,
as now at last given hostilestrokes,
and that not in the presence ofdreaded justice,
but on the ministers that dodistribute it,
in the name of the people
and in the power of us, thetribunes,
we, even from this instant,banish him our city,
in peril of precipitation fromoff the rock Tarpeian
never more to enter our Romegates.
In the people's name, I say itshall be so.
Hear me, my masters and mycommon friends
He's sentenced; no more hearing.
Let me speak.
I have been consul
and can show for Rome herenemies' marks upon me.
I do love my country's good witha respect more tender,
more holy and profound than mineown life,
my dear wife's estimate, herwomb's increase,
and treasure of my loins; thenif I would speak that贸
We know your drift; speak what?
There's no more to be said,
but he is banished as enemy tothe people and his country.
It shall be so.
It shall be so; it shall be so.
You common cry of curs
whose breath I hate as reek ofthe rotten fens,
whose loves I prize
as the dead carcasses ofunburied men
that do corrupt my air,
I banish you
and here remain with youruncertainty.
Let every feeble rumor shakeyour hearts.
Your enemies, with nodding oftheir plumes,
fan you into despair.
Have the power still to banishyour defenders
till at length your ignorance,which finds not till it feels,
deliver you as most abatedcaptives to some nation
that won you without blows.
Despising for you, the city,
thus I turn my back.
There is a world elsewhere.
Come, leave your tears.
A brief farewell.
The beast with many heads buttsme away.
Nay, mother, where is yourancient courage?
You were used to say extremitieswas the trier of spirits;
that common chances common mencould bear;
that when the sea was calm,
all boats alike showedmastership in floating.
You were used to load me withprecepts
that would make invincible theheart that conned them.
O, heavens; O, heavens.
Nay, good woman
Now the red pestilence strikeall trades in Rome
and occupations perish.
What, what, what?
I shall be loved when I amlacked.
Nay, good mother.
Resume that spirit when you werewont to say
if you had been the wife ofHercules,
six of his labors you'd havedone
and saved your husband so muchsweat.
Thy tears are salter than ayounger man's
and venomous to thine eyes.
My sometime general, I have seenthee stern
and thou hast oft beheldheart-hardening spectacles.
Tell these sad women
'tis fond to wail inevitablestrokes
as 'tis to laugh at them.
My mother,
you wot well my hazards stillhave been your solace.
and believed, not lightly,though I go alone,
like to a lonely dragon,
that his fen makes feared andtalked of more than seen.
Your son will or exceed thecommon
or be caught with cautelousbaits and practice.
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go?
Take good Cominius with theeawhile.
Determine on some course
more than a wild exposture toeach chance
that starts in the way beforethee.
O, the gods.
I'll follow thee a month,
devise with thee where thoushalt rest,
that thou shalt hear of us andwe of thee,
so if the time thrust forth acause for thy repeal,
we shall not send over the vastworld
to seek a single man and loseadvantage,
which doth ever cool in theabsence of the needer.
O, fare ye well.
Thou hast years upon thee.
Thou art too full of the wars'surfeits
to go rove with one that's yetunbruised.
Bring me but out at gate.
Come now, my sweet wife, mydearest mother,
and my friends of nobler touch.
When I am forth, bid me farewelland smile.
I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground,you shall hear from me still
and never of me aught but whatis like me
formerly.
Pray, come.
The nobility are vexed,
whom we see have sided in hisbehalf.
Now we've shown our power,
let us seem humbler after it isdone
than when it was a-doing.
Here comes his mother.
Let's not meet her.
- Why? - They say she's mad.
They have taken note of us; keepon your way.
O, ye're well met.
The hoarded plague of the godsrequite your love.
Peace, peace; be not so loud.
If that I could for weeping, youshould hear
Nay, and you shall hear some.
Will you be gone?
You shall stay too.
I would I had the power to sayso to my husband.
Are you mankind?
Ay, fool; is that a shame?
Note but this, fool.
Was not a man my father?
Hadst thou foxship to banish him
that struck more blows for Romethan thou has spoken words?
O, blessed heavens.
More noble blows than ever thouwise words,
and for Rome's good.
I'll tell thee what.
Yet go.
Nay, thou shalt stay too.
I would my son were in Arabia,and thy tribe before him,
his good sword in his hand.
- What then? - What then?
He'd make an end of thyposterity.
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that hedoes bear for Rome.
O, come, come, peace.
I would he had continued to hiscountry as he began
and not unknit himself the nobleknot he made.
I would he had.
"I would he had."
'Twas you incensed the rabble.
Cats that can judge as fitly ofhis worth
as I can of those mysteries
which heaven will not have Earthto know.
Pray, let's go.
Now, pray, sir, get you gone.
You have done a brave deed.
Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the capitol
exceed the meanest house inRome, so far my son,
this lady's husband here, this,do you see,
whom you've banished does exceedyou all.
Well, well; we'll leave you.
Why stay we to be baited withone that wants her wits?
Take my prayers with you.
I would the gods had nothingelse to do
but to confirm my curses.
Could I meet them but once aday,
it would unclog my heart withwhat lies heavy to it.
You have told them home,
and, by my troth, you havecause.
You'll sup with me?
Anger's my meat.
I sup upon myself
and so shall starve withfeeding.
Come, let's go.
Leave this faint puling andlament as I do,
in anger, Juno-like.
Come.
There hath been in Rome strangeinsurrections,
the people against the senators,patricians, and nobles.
Hath been?
Is it ended then?
Our state thinks not so.
They are in most warlikepreparation
and hope to come upon them inthe heat of their division.
The main blaze of it is past,
but a small thing would make itflame again,
for the nobles receive so toheart
the banishment of that worthyCoriolanus
that they are in a ripe aptness
to take all power from thepeople
and to pluck from them theirtribunes forever.
This lies glowing, I can tellyou,
and is almost mature for theviolent breaking out.
Coriolanus banished?
Banished, sir.
You will be welcome with thisintelligence.
The day serves well for themnow.
I've heard it said,
the fittest time to corrupt aman's wife
is when she's fallen out withher husband.
Your noble Tullus Aufidius willappear well in these wars,
his great opposer, Coriolanus,
being now in no request of hiscountry.
A goodly city is this Antium.
City, 'tis I that made thywidows.
Many an heir of these fairedifices
'fore my wars have I heard groanand drop.
Then know me not,
lest that thy wives with spitsand boys with stones
in puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.
And you.
Direct me, if it be your will,where great Aufidius lies.
Is he in Antium?
He is.
Which is his house, beseech you?
This here before you.
I'll thank you, sir.
Farewell.
O, world, thy slippery turns.
Friends now fast sworn,
whose double bosom seems to wearone heart,
whose hours, whose bed, whosemeal and exercise
are still together,
who twin, as 'twere, in loveunseparable,
shall, within this hour, on adissension of a doit,
break out to bitterest enmity.
So, fellest foes, whose passionsand whose plots
have broke their sleep to takethe one the other,
by some chance, some trick notworth an egg,
shall grow dear friends andinterjoin their issues.
So with me.
My birthplace hate I,
and my love's upon this enemytown.
I'll enter.
If he slay me, he does fairjustice.
If he give me way, I'll do hiscountry service.
Whence comest thou?
What wouldst thou?
Thy name?
Why speak'st not?
Speak, man; what's thy name?
If, Tullus, not yet thou knowestme,
and, seeing me,
does not think me for the man Iam,
necessity commands me namemyself.
What is thy name?
A name unmusical to the Volscianears
and harsh in sound to thine.
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance,
and thy face bears a command init,
though thy tackle's torn.
Thou show'st a noble vessel.
What's thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown.
Know'st thou me yet?
I know thee not.
Thy name?
My name is Caius Marcius
who hath done to theeparticularly
and to all the Volsces greathurt and mischief;
thereto witness may my surname,Coriolanus.
The painful service, the extremedangers,
and the drops of blood shed formy thankless country
are requited but with thatsurname,
a good memory,
and witness of the malice anddispleasure
which thou shouldst bear me.
Only that name remains.
The cruelty and envy of thepeople,
permitted by our dastard nobles,who have all forsook me,
hath devoured the rest andsuffered me
by the voice of slaves to bewhooped out of Rome.
Now this extremity hath broughtme to thy hearth,
not out of hope, mistake me not,to save my life,
for if I had feared death,
of all the men in the world, Iwould have 'voided thee,
but in mere spite,
to be full quit of those mybanishers,
stand I before thee here.
Then if thou hast a heart ofwreak in thee,
that will revenge thine ownparticular wrongs
and stop those maims of shameseen through thy country,
speed thee straight
and make my misery serve thyturn.
So use it that my revengefulservices
may prove as benefits to thee,
for I will fight against mycankered country
with the spleen of all the underfiends.
But if so be thou darest notthis
and that to prove more fortunesthou art tired,
then, in a word, I also amlonger to live most weary,
and present my throat to theeand to thy ancient malice,
which not to cut would show theebut a fool,
since I have ever followed theewith hate,
drawn tuns of blood from thycountry's breast,
and cannot live but to thyshame,
unless it be to do thee service.
O, Marcius, Marcius.
Each word thou hast spoke hathweeded from my heart
a root of ancient envy.
If Jupiter should from yondcloud speak divine things
and say, "Tis true,"
I'd not believe them more thanthee,
all noble Marcius.
Let me twine mine arms aboutthat body
where against my grained ash anhundred times hath broke
and scarred the moon withsplinters.
Here I clip the anvil of mysword
and do contest as hotly and asnobly with thy love
as ever in ambitious strength Idid contend against thy valor.
Know thou first, I loved themaid I married;
Never man sighed truer breath
but that I see thee here, thounoble thing,
more dances my rapt heart thanwhen I first
my wedded mistress saw bestridemy threshold.
Why, thou Mars.
I tell thee, we have a power onfoot,
and I had purpose once more
to hew thy target from thy brawn
or lose mine arm for it.
Thou hast beat me out twelveseveral times,
and I have nightly since dreamtof encounters
'twixt thyself and me.
We've been down together in mysleep,
unbuckling helms, fixing eachother's throats,
and waked half dead withnothing.
Worthy Marcius.
Had we no other quarrel else toRome
but that thou art thencebanished,
we would muster all from twelveto seventy
and pouring war into the bowelsof ungrateful Rome
like a bold flood o'er-bear it.
Come, go in
and take our friendly senatorsby the hands
who now are here,
taking their leaves of me,
who am prepared against yourterritories,
though not for Rome itself.
You bless me, gods.
Therefore, most absolute sir,
if thou wilt have the leading ofthine own revenges,
take the one half of mycommission
and set down, as best thou artexperienced,
since thou know'st thy country'sstrength and weakness,
thine own ways,
whether to knock against thegates of Rome
or rudely visit them in partsremote,
to fright them, ere destroy.
But come in.
Let me commend thee first
to those that shall say yea tothy desires.
A thousand welcomes
and more a friend than ever anenemy,
yet, Marcius, that was much.
We hear not of him, neither needwe fear him.
His remedies are tame.
The present peace and quietnessof the people,
which before were in wild hurry,
here do we make his friendsblush that the world goes well,
who rather had,
though they themselves didsuffer by it,
behold dissentious numberspestering streets
than see our tradesmen singingin their shops
and going about their functionsfriendly.
We stood to it in good time.
Is this Menenius?
'Tis he; 'tis he.
Hail sir.
Hail to you both.
Your Coriolanus is not muchmissed
but with his friends.
The commonwealth doth stand,
and so would do, were he moreangry at it.
Where is he, hear you?
No, I hear nothing.
His mother and his wife hearnothing from him.
Worthy tribunes,
there is a slave whom we haveput in prison,
reports the Volsces with twoseveral powers
are entered in the Romanterritories,
and with the deepest malice ofthe war
destroy what lies before them.
'Tis Aufidius who, hearing ofour Marcius' banishment,
thrusts forth his horns againinto the world
which were inshelled whenMarcius stood for Rome
and durst not once peep out.
Come, what talk you of Marcius?
Go, see this rumorer whipped.
It cannot be the Volsces darebreak with us.
Cannot be.
I have record that very well itcan,
and three examples of the likehave been within my age.
Tell not me.
I know this cannot be.
Not possible.
The nobles in great earnestness
are coming all to the senatehouse.
Some news there is that stirstheir countenances.
Well, 'tis this slave.
Go, whip him 'fore the people'seyes.
His raising, nothing but hisreport.
The slave's report is seconded,
and more, more fearful isdelivered.
What more fearful?
It is spoke freely out of manymouths,
how probably, I do not know,
that Marcius, joined withAufidius,
leads a power against Rome andvows revenge as spacious
as between the youngest andoldest thing.
O, you have made good work.
What news?
If Marcius should be joined withthe Volscians贸
If?
He is their god.
He leads them like a thing madeby some other deity
than nature that shapes manbetter,
and they follow him against usbrats,
with no less confidence
than boys pursuing summerbutterflies
or butchers killing flies.
You have made good work, you andyour apron-men
that stood so much upon thevoice of occupation
and the breath of garlic eaters.
All the regions do smilinglyrevolt
and who resist are mocked forvaliant ignorance
and perish constant fools.
Who is it can blame him?
Your enemies and his findsomething in him.
We are all undone unless thenoble man have mercy.
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot do it forshame.
The people deserve such pity ofhim
as the wolf does of theshepherds.
For his best friends, if theyshould say,
"Be good to Rome,"
they charged him even as thoseshould do that
had deserved his hate, andtherein showed like enemies.
'Tis true.
If he were putting to my house
the brand that should consumeit,
I have not the face to say,"Beseech you, cease."
You have brought a tremblingupon Rome.
Say not we brought it.
How; was it we?
We loved him but, like beastsand cowardly nobles,
gave way unto your clusters
who did hoot him out of thecity.
But I fear they'll roar him inagain.
Tullus Aufidius, the second nameof men,
obeys his points as if he werehis officer.
Desperation is all the policy,strength, and defense
that Rome can make against them.
Here come the clusters
that made the air unwholesome
when you cast your stinking,greasy caps
in hooting at Coriolanus' exile.
Faith, we hear fearful news.
For mine own part, when I said,"Banish him,"
I said 'twas pity.
And so did I.
And so did I,
and, to say the truth, so didvery many of us.
That we did, we did for thebest,
and though we willinglyconsented to his banishment,
yet it was against our will.
You're goodly things, youvoices.
You have made good work, you andyour cry.
Do they still fly to the Roman?
I do not know what witchcraft'sin him,
but your soldiers use him as thegrace 'fore meat,
their talk at table, and theirthanks at end,
and you are darkened by thisaction, sir,
even by your own.
I cannot help it now,
unless, by using means, I lamethe foot of our design.
He bears himself more proudlier,even to my person,
than I thought he would whenfirst I did embrace him.
Yet his nature in that's nochangeling;
and I must excuse what cannot beamended.
Yet I wish, sir I mean for yourparticular
you had not joined in commissionwith him,
but either had borne the actionof yourself
or else to him had left itsolely.
I understand thee well, and bethou sure,
when he shall come to hisaccount,
he knows not what I can urgeagainst him.
Although it seems, and so hethinks,
and is no less apparent to thevulgar eye,
that he bears all things fairly
and shows good husbandry for theVolscian state,
fights dragon-like
and does achieve as soon as drawhis sword,
yet he hath left undone thatwhich shall break his neck
or hazard mine whenever we cometo our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think youhe'll carry Rome?
All places yield to him ere hesits down
and the nobility of Rome arehis.
The senators and patricians lovehim too.
The tribunes are no soldiers,
and their people will be as rashin the repeal,
as hasty to expel him thence.
I think he'll be to Rome as isthe osprey to the fish
who takes it by sovereignty ofnature.
First he was a noble servant tothem,
but he could not carry hishonors even.
Whether 'twas pride,
which, out of daily fortune,ever taints the happy man;
whether defect of judgment,
to fail in the disposing ofthose chances
which he was lord of;
or whether nature,
not to be other than one thing,
not moving from the casque tothe cushion
but commanding peace even withthe same austerity and garb
as he controlled the war;
but one of these, as he hathspices of them all
not all, for I dare so far freehim贸
made him feared, so hated, andso banished.
But he has a merit to choke itin the utterance.
So our virtues lie in theinterpretation of the time.
And power, unto itself mostcommendable,
hath not a tomb so evident
as a chair to extol what it hathdone.
One fire drives out one fire;one nail, one nail;
rights by rights falter,
strengths by strengths do fail.
I tell you, he does sit in gold,
his eye red as 'twould burn Rome
and his injury the jailer to hispity.
I kneeled before him.
'Twas very faintly he said,"Rise,"
dismissed me thus, with hisspeechless hand.
You hear what he hath said whichwas sometime his general
who loved him in a most dearparticular.
He called me father.
But what of that?
Go, you that banished him,
a mile before his tent fall down
and knee the way into his mercy.
Nay, if he coyed to hearCominius speak,
I'll keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Do you hear?
Yet one time he did call me bymy name.
I urged our old acquaintance
and the drops that we have bledtogether.
Coriolanus he would not answerto,
forbad all names.
He was a kind of nothing,
titleless,
till he had forged himself
a name in the fire of burningRome.
Why, so.
You have made good work.
A pair of tribunes that haveracked for Rome
to make coals cheap, a noblememory.
I minded him how royal 'twas topardon
when it was less expected.
He replied, it was a barepetition of a state
to one whom they had punished.
Very well; could he say less?
I offered to awaken his regardfor his private friends.
His answer to me was,
he could not stay to pick them
in a pile of noisome, mustychaff.
He said 'twas folly for one poorgrain or two
to leave unburnt
and still to nose the offense.
For one poor grain or two.
I am one of those;
his mother, wife, his child,
and this brave fellow too, weare the grains.
You are the musty chaff,
and you are smelt above themoon.
We must be burnt for you.
Nay, pray, be patient.
If you refuse your aid in thisso never-needed help,
yet do not upbraid us for ourdistress.
But, sure, if you would be yourcountry's pleader,
your good tongue,
more than the instant army wecan make,
might stop our countryman.
No, I'll not meddle.
Pray you, go to him.
What should I do?
Only make trial what your lovecan do for Rome
towards Marcius.
Well, and say that Marciusreturn me,
as Cominius is returned,unheard; what then?
But as a discontented friendgrief-shot with his unkindness?
Say it be so?
Yet your good will must havethat thanks from Rome,
after the measure as youintended well.
I'll undertake it.
I think he'll hear me.
And the glorious gods love theeno worse
than thy old father Meneniusdoes.
O, my son; my son.
Thou art preparing fire for us.
Look thee, here is water toquench it.
I was hardly moved to come tothee,
but being assured that none butmyself could move thee,
I have been blown out of thygates with sighs
and conjure thee to pardon Rome
and thy petitionary countrymen.
Away.
How, away?
Wife, mother, child,
I know not.
My affairs are servanted toothers.
Though I owe my revengeproperly,
my remission lies in Volscianbreasts.
That we have been familiar,
ingrate forgetfulness shallpoison
rather than pity note how much.
Therefore, be gone.
My ears against your suits arestronger
than your gates against myforce.
Yet, for I loved thee, take thisalong.
I writ it for thy sake and wouldhave sent it.
Another word, Menenius, I willnot hear thee speak.
This man, Aufidius,
was my beloved in Rome.
Yet thou behold'st.
You keep a constant temper.
See you yond coign of thecapitol,
yond cornerstone?
Why, what of that?
If it be possible
for you to displace it with yourlittle finger,
there is some hope that theladies of Rome,
especially his mother, mayprevail with him.
But I say there is no hope init.
Our throats are sentenced andstay upon execution.
Is it possible that so short atime
can alter the condition of aman?
There is differency between agrub and a butterfly,
yet your butterfly was a grub.
This Marcius is grown from manto dragon.
He has wings.
He is more than a creepingthing.
He loved his mother dearly.
So did he me.
And he no more remembers hismother now
than an eight-year-old horse.
The tartness of his face soursripe grapes.
He sits in his state like athing made for Alexander.
What he bids be done is finishedwith his bidding.
He wants nothing of a god buteternity
and a heaven to throne in.
Yes, mercy, if you report himtruly.
I paint him in the character.
Mark what mercy his mother shallbring from him.
There's no more mercy in him
than there is milk in a maletiger,
that shall our poor city find,
and all this is long of you.
The gods be good unto us.
No, in such a case, the godswill not be good unto us.
When we banished him, werespected not them,
and, he returning to break ournecks,
they respect not us.
This last old man,
whom with a cracked heart I havesent to Rome,
loved me above the measure of afather,
nay, godded me, indeed.
Their latest refuge was to sendhim,
for whose old love I have,though I showed sourly to him,
once more offered the firstconditions,
which they did refuse and cannotnow accept
to grace him only that thoughthe could do more,
a very little I have yielded to.
Fresh embassies and suits,
nor from the state nor privatefriends
hereafter will I lend ear to.
My wife comes foremost,
then the honored mold whereinthis trunk was framed
and in her hand the grandchildto her blood.
But out, affection.
All bond and privilege of naturebreak.
Let it be virtuous to beobstinate.
What is that curt'sy worth,
or those doves' eyes which canmake gods forsworn?
I melt and am not of strongerearth than others.
My mother bows as if Olympus toa molehill
should in supplication nod,
and my young boy hath an aspectof intercession
which great nature cries, "Denynot."
Let the Volsces plow Rome andharrow Italy.
I'll never be such a gosling toobey instinct
but stand as if a man wereauthor of himself
and knew no other kin.
My lord and husband.
These eyes are not the same Iwore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thuschanged makes you think so.
Like a dull actor now, I haveforgot my part,
and I am out, even to a fulldisgrace.
Best of my flesh, forgive mytyranny,
but do not say for that,"Forgive our Romans."
O, a kiss long as my exile,
sweet as my revenge.
Now, by the jealous queen ofHeaven,
that kiss I carried from thee,dear,
and my true lip hath virgined itever since.
Ye gods, I prate,
and the most noble mother in theworld leave unsaluted.
Sink my knee in the earth.
Of thy deep duty,
more impression show than thatof common sons.
O, stand up blest.
Whilst, with no softer cushionthan the flint,
I kneel before thee andunproperly show duty,
as mistaken all this whilebetween the child and parent.
What's this?
Your knees to me?
To your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on thehungry beach
fillip the stars,
then let the mutinous winds
strike the proud cedars 'gainstthe fiery sun,
murdering impossibility
to make what cannot be slightwork.
Thou art my warrior.
I holp to frame thee.
Do you know this lady?
The noble sister of Publicola,
the moon of Rome,
chaste as the icicle that'scurdied by the frost
from purest snow and hangs onDian's temple.
Dear Valeria.
This is a poor epitome of yours,
which by the interpretation offull time
may show like all yourself.
The god of soldiers,
with the consent of supremeJove,
inform thy thoughts withnobleness.
Your knee, sirrah.
That's my brave boy.
Even he, your wife, this lady,and myself are suitors to you.
I beseech you, peace.
Or, if you'd ask, remember thisbefore:
The thing I have forsworn togrant
may never be held by youdenials.
Bid me not dismiss my soldiers
or capitulate again with Rome'smechanics.
Tell me not wherein I seemunnatural.
Desire not to ally my rages andrevenges
with your colder reasons.
O, no more; no more.
You have said you will not grantus any thing
for we have nothing else to ask
but that which you deny already,
yet we will ask
that if you fail in our request,
the blame may hang upon yourhardness.
Therefore, hear us.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark,
for we'll hear nought from Romein private.
Your request?
Should we be silent and notspeak,
our raiment and state of bodies
would bewray what life we haveled since thy exile.
Think with thyself how moreunfortunate
than all living women are wecome hither.
Since that thy sight,
which should make our eyes flowwith joy,
hearts dance with comforts,
constrains them weep and shakewith fear and sorrow,
making the mother, wife, andchild
to see the son, the father, thehusband
tearing his country's bowelsout.
And to poor we thine enmity'smost capital.
Thou barr'st us our prayers tothe gods,
which is a comfort that all butwe enjoy,
for how can we
alas,
how can we for our country pray
whereto we are bound,
together with thy victory,
whereto we are bound?
Alack, or we must lose thecountry, our dear nurse,
or else thy person,
our comfort in the country.
We must find an evidentcalamity,
though we had our wish whichside should win.
For either thou must, as aforeign recreant,
be led with manacles thoroughour streets,
or else triumphantly tread onthy country's ruin
and bear the palm for havingbravely shed
thy wife and children's blood.
For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortunetill these wars determine.
If I cannot persuade thee ratherto show a noble grace
to both sides than seek the endof one,
thou shalt no sooner march toassault thy country
than to tread trust to it, thoushalt not
on thy mother's womb thatbrought thee to this world.
Ay, and mine that brought youforth this boy
to keep your name living totime.
A' shall not tread on me.
I'll run away till I am bigger,
but then I'll fight.
Not of a woman's tenderness tobe
requires nor child nor woman'sface to see.
I have sat too long.
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our requestdid tend to save the Romans
thereby to destroy the Volsceswhom you serve,
you might condemn us aspoisonous of your honor.
No.
Our suit is that you reconcilethem.
while the Volsces may say, "Thismercy we've showed,"
the Romans, "This we received,"
and each in either side give theall hail to thee
and cry, "Be blest for making upthis peace."
Thou know'st, great son, the endof war's uncertain,
but this certain,
that if thou conquer Rome,
the benefit which thou shaltthereby reap
is such a name whose repetition
shall be dogged with curses,
whose chronicle thus writ:
"The man was noble,
"but with his last attempt, hewiped it out,
"destroyed his country,
and his name remains to theensuing age abhorred."
Speak to me, son.
Thou hast affected the finestrains of honor,
to imitate the graces of thegods,
to tear with thunder the widecheeks of the air,
and yet to charge thy sulphurwith a bolt
that should but rive an oak.
Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honorable for anoble man
still to remember wrongs?
Daughter, speak you.
He cares not for your weeping.
Thou hast never in thy life
showed thy dear mother anycourtesy
when she, poor hen fond of nosecond brood,
has clucked thee to the wars andsafely home,
loaden with honor.
Say my request's unjust andspurn me back,
but if it be not so,
thou art not honest
and the gods will plague theethat thou restrain'st from me
the duty which to a mother'spart belongs.
He turns away.
Down, ladies.
Let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname, Coriolanus,
'longs more pride than pity toour prayers.
Down.
An end.
This is the last.
So we will home to Rome and dieamong our neighbors.
Nay, behold us.
This boy that cannot tell whathe would have
but kneels and holds up handsfor fellowship
does reason our petition withmore strength
than thou hast to deny it.
Come, let us go.
This fellow had a Volscian tohis mother.
His wife is in Corioli
and his child like him bychance.
Nay.
Give us our dispatch.
I am hushed until our city beafire,
and then I'll speak a little.
O, mother.
Mother.
What have you done?
Behold, the heavens do ope,
the gods look down,
and this unnatural scene
they laugh at.
O, my mother.
Mother.
O.
You have won a happy victory toRome,
but, for your son
Believe it; O, believe it,
most dangerously you have withhim prevailed,
if not most mortal to him.
But, let it come.
Aufidius,
though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace.
And, good Aufidius, were you inmy stead,
would you have heard a motherless
or granted less, Aufidius?
I was moved withal.
I dare be sworn you were.
And, sir, it is no little thing
to make mine eyes to sweatcompassion.
What, good sir, what peaceyou'll make,
advise me.
For my part, I'll not to Rome,
I'll back with you and pray you,
stand to me in this cause.
O, mother.
Wife.
I am glad thou hast set thymercy and thy honor
at difference in thee.
Out of that, I'll work myself aformer fortune.
Behold our patroness, the lifeof Rome.
Call all your tribes together,praise the gods,
and make triumphant fires.
Strew flowers before them.
Unshout the noise that banishedMarcius,
repeal him with the welcome ofhis mother,
cry, "Welcome, ladies; welcome."
Welcome, ladies;
welcome.
Go tell the lords of the city Iam here.
Deliver them this paper.
Most noble sir,
if you do hold the same intentwherein you wished us parties,
we'll deliver you of your greatdanger.
Sir, I cannot tell.
We must proceed as we do findthe people.
The people will remain uncertain
whilst 'twixt you there'sdifference,
but the fall of either makes thesurvivor heir of all.
I know it,
and my pretext to strike at himadmits a good construction.
He came unto my hearth,
presented to my knife histhroat.
I took him;
made him joint servant with me;
gave him way in all his owndesires;
nay, let him choose out of myranks
his projects to accomplish,
my best and freshest men;
served his designments in mineown person;
holp to reap the fame which hedid end all his;
and took some pride to do myselfthis wrong.
Till, at the last,
I seemed his follower notpartner,
and he waged me with hiscountenance
as if I had been mercenary.
So he did, my lord.
The army marveled at it, and, inthe last,
when he had carried Rome
and that we looked for no lessspoil than glory贸
There was it.
For the which my sinews shall bestretched upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum,
which are as cheap as lies,
he sold the blood and labor ofour great action.
Therefore shall he die and I'llrenew me in his fall.
Hail, lords.
I am returned your soldier,
no more infected with mycountry's love
than when I parted hence
but still subsisting under yourgreat command.
You are to know
that prosperously I haveattempted
and with bloody passage
led your wars even to the gatesof Rome.
Our spoils we have brought homedoth more than counterpoise
a full third part the charges ofthe action.
We have made peace
with no less honor to theAntiates
than shame to the Romans
and here deliver,
subscribed by the consuls andpatricians,
together with the seal of thesenate,
what we have compounded on.
Read it not, noble lords,
but tell the traitor in thehighest degree
he hath abused your powers.
Traitor?
How now?
Ay, traitor, Marcius.
Marcius.
Ay, Marcius,
Caius Marcius.
Dost thou think I'll grace theewith that robbery,
thy stolen name Coriolanus inCorioli?
You lords and heads of thestate,
perfidiously he has betrayedyour business and given up,
for certain drops of salt, yourcity Rome.
I say "your city," to his wifeand mother,
breaking his oath and resolutionlike a twist of rotten silk,
never admitting counsels of thewar,
but at his nurse's tears,
he whined and roared away yourvictory
that pages blushed at him
and men of heart lookedwondering each at other.
Hear'st thou, Mars?
Name not the god, thou boy oftears.
No more.
Measureless liar,
thou hast made my heart toogreat for what contains it.
Boy.
O, slave.
Pardon me, lords.
'Tis the first time that ever Iwas forced to scold.
Your judgments, my grave lords,Must give this cur the lie
and his own notion,
who wears my stripes impressedupon him,
that must bear my beating to hisgrave,
shall join to thrust the lieunto him.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces.
Men and lads, stain all youredges on me.
Boy.
False hound.
If you have writ your annalstrue,
'tis there that, like an eaglein a dovecote,
I fluttered your Volscians inCorioli.
Alone I did it.
Boy.
Why, noble lords,
will you be put in mind of hisblind fortune,
which was your shame,
by this unholy braggart?
Peace, ho.
No outrage.
Peace.
The man is noble
and his fame folds in this orbof the earth.
His last offenses to us shallhave judicious hearing.
Stand, Aufidius, and trouble notthe peace.
O, that I had him, with sixAufidiuses
or more, his tribe, to use mylawful sword.
Insolent villain.
Kill.
Kill!
My lords,
when you shall know
as in this rage, provoked byhim, you cannot
the great danger this man's lifedid owe you,
you'll rejoice that he is thuscut off.
My rage is gone,
and I am struck with sorrow.
Though in this city
he hath widowed and unchildedmany a one
which to this hour bewail theinjury,
yet he shall have a noblememory.